Hey Joe, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
>> Hi Michael, it's a pleasure to be here.
>> It's a pleasure to have you here.
We're talking Python to an R person.
What's going on here? What's happening?
>> I know, right?
>> Cats and dogs living together.
Oh my gosh. No, it's great.
Glad to have you here.
>> Yeah. Thanks.
>> Yeah, you bet. So we're going to talk about Shiny,
which has traditionally been UI framework,
a web framework for kind of a rad, rapid development
for R applications that need some interactivity.
But you have a big release for the Python people.
That's also interesting and worth talking about.
So that's the topic of today's show.
- Yeah, absolutely.
I hope you starting out mentioning R
that people haven't dropped off already.
I promise this will have lots to say about Python
and Shiny for Python.
Of course, I'm sure signing up for Python is going to be super fun.
Before we get to that, though, let's get started with your story.
How did you get into programming?
R and then what brought you over to Python?
At least temporarily or partially?
Yeah.
My background was in web programming really more than anything else.
I got into programming actually through desktop publishing and graphic design.
That was what I was really excited about.
And in college that turned into web design.
I went to college from 1996 through 2000 so that the height of the dot com sort of craziness.
And I just found my baby and all that stuff.
Oh yeah, absolutely.
That's dot com.
That's right.
And I just found myself sort of pulled into just all the cool things that we could do
on the web and went from sort of front end web development, which meant something very
different back then than it does today.
I mean, HTML, right?
HTML, yep.
Basically, string interpolation as a career.
That was what I was all about.
And that sort of led me into really falling in love with programming as a discipline.
And I got more into the backend, more into sort of closer and closer to the systems level
programming.
I just really enjoyed being sort of full stack,
both on the website and even spent a few years
doing Windows desktop programming,
just to kind of see what that world was like.
And one of the things that I,
like one of the best things that happened to me early
in my career was hooking up with JJ Allaire,
who's the founder of RStudio
and the founder of two other companies
that I worked for previous to that in Boston.
And I kind of got to the point in my career
where I was more interested in the people I was working with
than the technologies or even the idea.
I knew I liked startups and I knew I liked working for JJ
and the people that he had around him.
And he got excited about R.
I don't, I think his friend who was like a high school
science teacher somehow got turned on to R
and JJ was fascinated by the fact that,
this is in 2008 or 2009, there was this GPL licensed platform
for doing what traditionally people would do in very
proprietary platforms like all these statistics packages that
you might have been forced to learn in college, you know, back
in the 2000s. And here was this pretty rough, pretty raw, but
all the pieces were their kind of platform for doing all this
stuff with code. And he immediately saw something and I definitely saw nothing. But I believed
in JJ and he had the idea to build an IDE in a web browser for this R language. And
I was like, I don't see the chain in thinking that leads you to think that this is a good
idea but also sounds super fun. And I would love to see if it's possible to build an IDE
the web. And so in the beginning, really, I was in R completely by accident. And I didn't
even really learn much R as I was building, helping to build the RStudio IDE.
That's kind of the irony of those types of platforms, right?
100%.
When I talk to people about Jupyter Notebooks, they're enabling Python people, but they're
writing TypeScript.
That's exactly right.
You know that.
That's right.
What's the story for RStudio, Cy?
Yeah, yeah. Oh, it's a crazy story technology wise.
Well, the part that's not crazy, the sort of hardcore server bits are written in C++.
But the front end is written in Java, which is then transpiled to JavaScript using a package called Google Web Toolkit.
Oh yeah, okay, sure.
Okay, so you've heard of GWT.
I haven't written anything with it, but yeah, I know it, sure.
Yeah, I mean in a world before TypeScript and before React,
this really was a godsend, to be able to have static typing
and the right sort of abstractions to be able to really build large scale.
I mean, RStudio is a giant piece of software,
hundreds and hundreds of thousands of lines of code.
And I think the very best JavaScript developers can write code bases
that large of pure JavaScript, but not me.
I definitely needed the crutch of static type checking.
And anyway, yeah, and working on RStudio IDE was a blast.
And the best thing about it was I
got to meet so many data scientists.
And at the time, we called them statisticians.
Now they're called data scientists.
But learning what they do, what the problems they were solving
was so interesting, and that eventually led to Shiny.
And that's when I really started getting serious about actually
writing R code in my day-to-day, which was a fascinating journey
in and of itself.
>>Luis: Yeah.
Well, I would say that your faith was well-placed, right?
Even if you're like, I'm not sure about this RStudio thing.
I think some people have heard of it.
>>Tom: Yeah.
Yeah, it really has been such an incredible ride.
And there were many steps along the way where I was like,
this does not really make a ton of sense to me.
But JJ has proven out time and time again that things
that he cares about, it turns out
that there are other people that care about it.
So he was really super into reproducible research
before it was on everybody's lips.
And he really spent a lot of time
trying to make that world better for R.
And by then, I'd certainly learned
to sort of trust in his instincts.
And just time after time, there have
been many bets like that that have paid off really well.
It must have been pretty gratifying to work
on this project and then talk to these data scientists
and say, here, oh, we're doing this work at the Large Hadron
Collider, or we're doing this work to solve cancer.
And let me, you got to, can you help me with this?
I'm trying to like work on this protein folding or, you know,
something like that, right?
It was probably some really cool experiences you had like that.
- A hundred percent.
Yeah. I think the first time I ever demoed Shiny in particular
at a user group meeting, and I was super nervous
and went a little overboard on having like lots of demos.
And one of them, this is back in 2012,
was charting the spread of AIDS throughout the world
and showing the sort of levels rise and fall as time went on.
And it was interesting at the time because AIDS was sort of receding
as education and drugs were getting better, except in South Africa, it was getting much, much worse
before finally starting to get better because of many reasons.
And so I showed this demo and then afterwards a friend of mine who I didn't know what he worked on,
I didn't know what we worked on.
I just knew him through these user group meetings.
Came up and said, oh yeah, I'm working at,
I think he was at Fred Hutch at the time,
working on an AIDS vaccine.
And we're using Shiny to basically be the bridge
between the biostatisticians and the biologists
and looking at the results of these assays
or whatever it was that they were analyzing.
That was just blew me away.
And absolutely, every conference I go to,
many times a year between then and now,
I've just been humbled by the kind of things
that people are doing with Shiny.
- Yeah, I can relate.
I hear some stories like that as well,
and I imagine it's just 10x when you're building
developer tools like that.
So how about now?
What are you doing day to day?
- Yeah, well my title is CTO.
That is an honorary title that I think reflects
that I was the first employee,
but I don't do traditional CTO type activities
most of the time.
My day to day, I help lead the Shiny team specifically,
which is a team of maybe 10 or 11 right now,
mostly engineers.
And we split our time between Shiny for R
and Shiny for Python.
Right now, probably more on the Shiny for Python side,
given that there's so much more to do.
And right now I am in the thick of it,
writing features for the next release of Shiny for Python.
really getting to lean into React.
I've been working with some really fun
like headless table libraries to build data grids
with fast virtualized scrolling.
That should be a really nice addition
to Shiny for Python for the next release.
- Okay, yeah, that sounds really cool.
Well, let's talk about Shiny itself.
I suspect a lot of people on the data science side
have heard of Shiny, even though it's in the R space.
I know the conversations come up around it.
Other ones that live in a similar orbit,
maybe, or Streamlit.
I've had Adrian, the founder of Streamlit, on before,
and we've got Dash, and Panel, and Pinecone, and others.
That sets the stage for what this could be about.
Maybe give folks a sense of just what is Shiny,
and maybe even in its R form originally,
and then we can talk about the Python side. Yeah, absolutely. So Shiny is a way to create
web applications easily without having to learn a lot of web development technologies like HTML,
CSS, and JavaScript. Especially JavaScript. Especially JavaScript, 100%. The interactive
part of all these, like this callback, it's that, 100%.
Yeah.
And it was conceived primarily for data science.
I think a lot of the ideas behind Shiny are quite general,
and I'm sure we'll delve more into that.
But we, in the creation design of this,
we really are laser focused on data science and the kinds
of problems that people want to solve
by creating interactive visualizations,
interactive reports, and even workflow applications,
but all of it around the analyzing of data.
This was, in 2012, this was a pretty radical notion.
And I think there was a little bit of skepticism
from some people close to us who were thinking,
you're going to make data science?
I would data science scientists want to become web developers.
And I think this was--
the answer was like, there are really a lot of problems
that they can solve using interactive artifacts.
But the whole point is that they do not
have to become web developers.
Yeah, I was going to say, you should turn that on its head
and say, they don't want to become web developers, which
is exactly the value proposition.
They want to share their work, and they
want to make it interactive and collaborative.
but the last thing they want, generally speaking,
is to like, oh, and I'm diving into Vue and React and,
yeah, all that stuff, right?
- Absolutely, yeah.
And that being said, I think I personally am,
I've been doing web development since basically 1996,
and the idea of working day in and day out
on a project that was really sort of like
my first website type, something that had a lot of guardrails,
something that really limited you to whatever few tools
were in its toolbox.
That wouldn't be really satisfying or interesting
for me.
So even though Shiny is designed to be very easy to get started
and for you not to have to know JavaScript or anything
like that, if you do know JavaScript,
if you do know HTML and CSS, if you live and breathe
that stuff, but you want to create a convenient way
to create data science-related applications.
Shiny really lets you lean into those skills as well
and use HTML, CSS, and JavaScript to enhance or customize
or extend Shiny for your own purposes.
It's really important to us to capture
sort of both ends of that spectrum.
- Yeah, okay.
We'll talk about the programming model and how it works,
but I think maybe the first big contrast
that I'd like you to set up for us
is thinking of the Python side now,
like why not just Jupyter Notebooks?
Why not Jupyter Notebooks or JupyterLab and just,
we have that, that's on the web sort of, kind of sometimes.
(laughing)
It depends how we wanna put it up there
or share it or let it be executable, but, you know.
- Sure. - Compared to that.
I think it's pretty different, but you know,
I think it's something that people
maybe wanna get their head around.
- Yeah, no, totally.
You're right, I mean, you hear a lot of the same words
being used, right?
Like, it's browser-based applications
that do interactive things.
And I think the difference is that Jupyter and JupyterLab,
those are sort of the places where data scientists can
do work, right?
Where you can ask unbounded kinds of questions
from your data.
That's where you iterate, where you do exploratory data
analysis, where you write functions and things like that.
And yeah, you do have this beautiful immediacy
to the results that you get, right?
That's why everybody really loves working in notebooks.
And Shiny and frameworks like it are really
for communicating outwards.
It's really not for the data scientists
to write code for their own understanding most of the time.
It's really about creating a web application
to show somebody else.
So let's say that you are collaborating
with some people that don't have the programming chops that you
do that have never launched a REPL in their life
or installed Python.
And you want to give them the ability
to ask questions of your data and of your analysis.
Maybe what-if scenarios, or in the simplest case,
think like a BI dashboard or something like that.
Nobody's asking why execs need to look at a BI dashboard
instead of running SQL queries on their own inside
of a console.
And this is similar.
So if you want to create an interactive artifact for other people to consume, then Shiny and
frameworks like it come into play, and Jupyter not as much.
I mean, you can certainly save Jupyter notebooks and then sort of share a link to the published
notebook.
But the interactivity is either non-existent or more limited when you do things that way.
Right.
Absolutely.
the full notebook because the last thing you want
is the general public typing
- That's right. - Panther code in there
or arbitrary Python code,
but you wanna give them some interactivity.
You know, maybe we could look at this little example
down here just to, you know, just talk through
like what an app might look like.
Right on the homepage, shiny.poset.co,
you have, you know, I think this is kind of a big
statement towards your commitment to Python. It's like right on the home page on equal on par with
R. It says get started with R, get started with Python. You scroll down, it has the R in the Python code, right?
Like they're, you know, oh yeah, we also we're making an attempt at this Python thing. But you've got this
example, do you want to just give us a quick talk to what this app is? It looks like it evaluates
things about ducks and that's all I can tell about it. Yeah, so this is using the Palmer's
penguins data sets.
>> Penguins rather, OK.
>> Yeah, yeah.
So on the left, we have a sidebar
with a number of controls.
There's two select boxes.
There's some check boxes.
And then there's a couple of toggle switches.
And on the right, you have a matplotlib-generated scatter
plot with some marginal plots added on.
And this is sort of the "Hello, World" of Shiny,
where you have one or more outputs and some inputs
that, when you change them, the output automatically updates.
In this case, you can decide what variables
do you want to apply to the x and y-axes.
And then you can filter it by the species of penguin.
And then there are a couple of toggles
to just decide whether you want coloring by species
and whether you want the marginal plots or not.
And it sort of does everything that you
would expect it to do when you select and deselect
those values.
>>Yeah, so for example, you have filter by species,
and Gen 2 is checked.
But if I uncheck it, the whole UI
redraws with just showing the other two species of penguin.
And you can turn the species on and off,
and turn some whether or not it highlights based on that.
You've got a dropdown for different things you might compare,
and you can just toggle those, and the UI changes kind of like
you wrote a fancy front-end JavaScript framework,
where that's happening behind the scenes, right?
That's right. That's right.
Sorry, I didn't mean to cut you off there.
Yeah, and just to be clear, when you say the UI redraws,
we're not talking about a whole page reload.
I mean, it's not 1998.
It is the things that need to update on the page.
- Yeah, I think it's a really interesting way
to create programs and there's a couple other things
I've seen that are like this,
but I really, I think it's a super slick framework.
Before we get into it, Diego's got a question.
It says, "Could China be used to do fancy math,
"say for someone trying to upload their GitHub website
"for their PhD thesis model?"
Like, what can we create?
Like, could you create a kind of a LaTeX looking integrated thing with interactive math bits
in there?
Right, right.
Yeah, yeah.
So yes, you do have the ability to do...
Well, I could interpret that question one of two ways.
Can you do the computation for this PhD thesis model?
In that case, absolutely.
It's just whatever you can express in Python or R for that matter.
In terms of putting LaTeX equations on the screen,
yes, this is a completely built-in feature for Shiny for R.
And for Shiny for Python, it's a little less slick,
but we do have an example application
that shows how to drop in.
It's based on MathJax, basically.
So you can include the resources for MathJax
and then write your equation in LaTeX format.
And yeah, it'll render.
Diego, I hope that answers your question.
>>Hope so as well.
Yep.
Seems like it.
All right, so let's jump over to the GitHub page
for a minute here and talk through some of the things
that you all call out right at the top.
So it's open source for one, right?
That's a big deal.
It's under the MIT license right here on GitHub
under pi-shiny.
- Yeah.
I should add, full disclosure,
we are a for-profit company.
We are a B Corp, actually we're a benefit corp,
but we are for-profit.
And Shiny for Python is completely open source,
MIT license, no sort of gotchas there.
But when it comes to deploy your Shiny app,
we have a variety of different ways you can do that
that we offer as a company.
We have an open source on-prem solution called Shiny Server.
We have hosted cloud hosting that we manage
that you can easily deploy to.
And we have free and paid tiers.
And we also have Posit Connect, which
is a more comprehensive platform for enterprises
to allow their data scientists to communicate
with the rest of the organization.
And that has very robust enterprise-grade Shiny for Python hosting built in, and that is a paid product.
- Okay. So does it have special ways to access your SQL server on your enterprise?
You know, like, authenticated access to data or auth to the thing itself to protect it and so on?
- Yeah, for sure, auth to the thing itself, and it integrates with your LDAP or SSO-type systems.
And it helps with scaling your application.
So it will sort of monitor how much load
each of your Python processes is getting
and then spawn automatically scale up.
It can hook up to Kubernetes in the backend
so that your Shiny apps,
the Python computation is happening in pods on the backend.
So lots and lots of different ways
that it sort of tries to make things easier.
- Sure. Okay, cool.
Very cool.
So basically, short story is,
Shiny for Python's open source.
I could take the on-prem open source thing
and just host it myself if I wanted.
I presume that means I could also fire up a virtual machine
in the cloud and install it up there
and that's my on-prem if I wish.
- Yeah, absolutely.
And this is also, Shiny for Python is built
on top of Starlet, which is the same underlying framework
that FastAPI uses.
So it's almost true that anywhere you can host FastAPI,
you can host Shiny for Python.
- Oh, interesting.
Just put some G unicorn, uv corn workers in front of it.
- Except G unicorn.
Yeah, the only exception is that
because Shiny for Python is stateful
and we can talk more about that.
I'm assuming we're gonna talk a little bit
about how we compare to some of the other things out there.
We do need, if you're gonna load balance
across multiple processes, it does
have to be a stateful load balancer, which
is normally quite easy to do.
But gunicorn is not stateless.
It's not sticky.
It's stateless, yeah.
Sorry.
Yeah.
So you need a sticky load balancer.
And oh, I should also mention that Hugging Face
is another place that you can deploy Shiny for Python apps
these days.
Yeah, excellent.
OK, well, I think that that's certainly a fair trade-off.
So the commercial side of your story,
which we started talking about by opening a new company
and going to work on that, is really
about shiny as a service and a shiny cloud.
So it's easy to not worry about the deployment side.
The app itself, the framework itself,
is about not worrying about writing web stuff.
The deployment thing is still a deal.
If you just say-- and then just get--
dear data scientists, you fire up your Linux machines
and you keep them up to date and secure.
And that doesn't feel great to a lot of data scientists
either, I'm sure.
- Yeah, yeah, that's right.
So I think with our open source on-prem hosting,
it's like that, it's just a piece of software
that you install on Linux.
And with Connect, it's more like your IT department
sets this up for you.
And then you straight from your local machine,
once you have your Shiny app working,
you just type in a command like rsconnect deploy and point it at your server and everything gets taken care of for you,
including, you know, getting all the right Python dependencies installed on the server and using the right version of Python.
And hopefully, the act of, you know, we have we have customers that are writing multiple new shiny apps a day and
deploying multiple new shiny apps a day. And you know, they're the usefulness of that app might be a day or it might be,
five years and we want to serve both sides of that spectrum.
- I suspect that does make a lot of sense
if you're a data scientist exploring something,
you can be like, hey, look, I came up with this today,
what did you think?
And it may be the next day based on feedback,
you do something completely different
and it's become irrelevant, right?
- Yeah, you know what, one interesting thing about this is,
you hear about something like Shiny for Python,
like Streamlit or Dash, and you think that this is,
you know, this is really about displacing say Power BI and Tableau, right?
But actually, in our experience with Shiny for R,
the first thing it displaced were gigantic PDFs that people were sending around.
You know, like I have generated all of this data for my analysis.
I don't know what you want.
So here is like a 500-page PDF filled with tables for you to go explore.
And with Shiny, you can present something
that's much more interactive.
That makes it much easier for some domain expert
on the other side to find a needle in the haystack
that you happen to be working with.
- Well, you completely removed that cycle,
that iteration cycle of,
well, what if we used a different number
for this constraint here?
What if we only filtered, it's like,
that's part of the UI,
that's part of what you deliver is that interactivity.
And as far as displacing things,
it sounds like you're displacing SharePoint.
if that could just be completely erased from the world,
that would be awesome.
Because every interaction I have with that software
of sharing like corporate stock sharing is just like,
oh boy, here we go.
Okay, let's take it top to bottom maybe for here in this.
Although I do have to point out,
I could tell you still have that love for R
because it's still 0.2% R.
(laughing)
I love it, it's 47% Python, 47% JavaScript,
0.2% R.
I just want to make it clear, you do not have to install R to run Shiny for Python.
I think that R is, there's a couple of scripts that we use that we grab resources from the
Shiny for R repo.
And I think that was one of the first things that one of our programmers did and they didn't
know Python yet.
So they wrote it in R.
That's fine.
It's fine.
I just thought it was funny that it's there, but just a shade of it.
Okay.
thing that you point out here is how is Shiny different from some of the things I said that
it was like, for example, Streamlit or Dash?
Yeah, absolutely.
Maybe touch on that a little.
Sure.
And I think really the one that comes up the most is Streamlit.
Man, Streamlit really has taken the world by storm, it seems like, since they came out
in, what was it, 2018, something like that?
Yeah, I think it's 2018.
It's only been a few years.
clearly really resonated with the Python world.
And I do have to say, I was very taken aback by the simplicity of their programming model when it first came out.
And I pay a little bit of attention to new things that come out and purport to be high-level web frameworks.
And most of the time they were sort of like, "Okay, I recognize the trade-offs that they're making here."
But the Streamlit one was definitely a very bold choice
that they made.
Streamlit, I think it feels to me
that they really prioritized ease of getting started
and having the simplest possible mental model in a much higher
level of priority than everything else, which
is a bold stance.
And I really applaud them for being sort of clear
about what their vision is.
So Streamlit is unbelievably easy to get started with.
I think primarily because,
I don't know if you've done a lot of Streamlit,
but it has this top to bottom execution model.
- A lot of time, but yeah.
- Yeah, like if you were to start out with
not a Jupyter notebook, but like a regular Python script
that was doing a bunch of data analysis stuff,
you know, reading data, maybe doing some transformations
and then outputting some, you know, tables and plots.
Streamlit lets you take that sort of straight up
and down script and sprinkle in some Streamlit inputs
and outputs, and boom.
Like you have now written an interactive Streamlit app.
You just say, Streamlit run, and then the name of the file,
and it just works.
And in that sense, it's quite incredible.
It's very easy to get started with.
And the cost to spin up a new Streamlit app
is so low that--
I was actually talking to a YouTuber, Fenilo--
I don't remember his last name.
I think there's one Fenilo in the Streamlit world.
And he was saying that he actually
uses this instead of Jupyter Notebooks
to do interactive exploratory data analysis, which
I thought was interesting.
But the sort of drawback of having this simple of a model
is that it really works well for the simplest apps.
And then the model is a little bit too simple for even
moderately complex--
it's not even complex, but just like you, sooner or later,
will often, in a surprising way, smack into some surprising wall.
And this is not something that is theoretical.
We definitely have talked to a lot of Streamlit users.
And even the happy ones will say,
we really, this is just for prototypes
and then we throw them out because you just cannot,
you can't think of Streamlit apps as something
that can grow with you as your needs grow.
So I think the sort of time from zero to value
for Streamlit is almost zero.
That's incredibly quick.
But the time from value to the time of,
okay, now we're gonna throw this thing out and--
the last 20%.
Yeah, and it's actually not the last 20%.
I think it's more like the last 60%.
And I mean, that might be uncharitable and unbiased.
But honestly, using this framework,
which it's not to take away from their achievements.
It clearly has resonated incredibly strongly
with a lot of people in the Python world.
But I think no one who uses Streamlit seriously
will tell you that you can do most of the things
that you want in this sort of top to bottom execution model.
You will often, in surprisingly quick ways,
run into limitations there.
And I do want to say, like Streamlit, they recognized this.
And after some time, they added some features
that try to give you ways to work around that top
to bottom execution model.
They introduced the notion of session state,
And they introduced multiple attempts
at nice caching abstractions.
And I think they make somewhat more complex apps possible.
But I really-- I mean, I'm happy to recommend Streamlit
for those easy cases.
I cannot recommend Streamlit once you start
getting into session state.
It really is quite a fragile paradigm to be coding in.
And by the way, just to make it clear here,
I don't have a huge financial motivation to lie about this.
Posit Connect, which is the way we make money in this area,
it is designed to host Streamlit as well.
And we have a lot of customers that do that.
So it doesn't matter to us whether you use Shiny or
Streamlit.
I mean, it matters to me personally.
It makes me feel good when people use Shiny.
But as a business, we 100% love when our customers use Streamlit.
And but it really is, I think--
we'll talk more about reactive programming later, I hope.
But what it doesn't give you is a nice model
for the complicated stuff.
It only gives you a nice model for the very, very simplest
stuff.
Which serves an important role, but also means
that Shiny might serve an important role, too.
Another question from the audience,
I think maybe worth a diversion is,
you got real world examples of Shiny for Python
that you could talk about?
And I'll let me take a step back
since it's so brand new, just Shiny, right?
Because I feel like the feature set is pretty similar.
It's just like the R people have been at it
for a lot longer, you know?
- Yeah, absolutely.
And just to make clear,
so Shiny for R has been around since 2012.
Shiny for Python has been an alpha since last year,
And we just took the alpha tag off in the last, I don't know,
six weeks or maybe less than that.
Yeah, so I think--
and I'm sorry I didn't come prepared with any more links
than what's on the website.
But there is a--
we have a Discord where people are starting to gather
and talk about some of the things
that they're doing with Shiny for Python.
So yeah, I think on the left here,
If you select, say, orbit simulation--
Yeah, the orbit simulation is cool.
This is a demo written by one of our engineers.
But this is using--
well, first of all, we haven't talked about this,
but this is actually using Wasm.
So there is no Python running on the background here.
This is using a feature of Shiny called Shiny Live.
So this is using Pyodide, which is
the same sort of Python in the browser technology
that PyScript is currently using.
And you still write your Shiny app using Python.
You still don't have to write any HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.
But when you run it, you can run it straight out of a web
browser, as you can see here.
So that's why it took a little bit longer to get started,
is because it's installing Python into your browser
and installing AstroPipe.
ALEC LEE: Well, you say a while.
It took like two seconds the first time.
[INAUDIBLE]
BRIAN KARDELL: Yeah, I forget that.
For your listeners, they won't be able to see that way.
Yeah, so this is an example of a relatively simple set
of inputs and one 3D output that I think, in this case,
is being rendered with matplotlib.
And you can choose some different parameters
about the Earth, Moon, and Sun, and Planet X.
And it has arbitrarily complicated calculations
happening on the back end by AstroPi to determine
how these bodies would move when they're
affected by each other's gravity.
So there's a lot of Shiny apps that
are like this, that there is one particular algorithm,
one particular model that it's demonstrating,
and then wanting to show what happens when
you try different parameters.
I'd say this is in the simplest category of Shiny apps
in terms of what's easy to imagine here.
And yeah, there's some other stuff on the left there.
Some of these example apps show the use of different widgets.
So there's one for Plotly there.
You can use the Plotly JavaScript-based
visualization library with Shiny for Python
if you want your scatter plots to have tooltips that show
data, for example.
I mean, this particular one seems not to do that much.
And you can use--
Yeah, there's a Wordle clone.
I love how it looks like a mobile phone keyboard.
I have a whole keyboard right here.
Now you could type into the mobile phone keyboard.
Yeah.
Wordy?
No, it didn't take it.
Come on.
No.
That's pretty funny.
Yeah. Yeah. Those are just the beginning ones, right? You even have camera input. I don't
know what that's going to do. I guess. Oh, this is designed for a phone. Yeah. We have
another example that's not on here that will use your webcam. But yeah, it's okay. But
it doesn't I don't think it works on the WASM mode. So yeah, there's probably security limitations
and or other. Yeah. Yeah. I will say one thing that you won't see as much here that you do
do see on Shiny for R is interactive dashboards,
or even non-interactive real-time streaming
dashboards, not because the underlying technology is not
there, but because the actual UI widgets for making something
that looks like a dashboard is in Shiny for R,
but not in Shiny for Python.
But that is coming within the next, I don't know,
hopefully week or two weeks.
So we have a new release coming that
adds a lot more UI stuff.
And that is a very, very common use of Shiny
is for people that are creating dashboards that
show key performance indicators and time series plots
and geographic data plotted on an interactive leaflet map.
That's the bread and butter for a lot of data scientists
out there who are using Shiny.
OK.
That sounds very exciting and the kind of stuff
that no one wants to do on the web.
Very few people want to do directly on the web.
you want to be able to just grab a library.
- Yeah.
- All right, so I sent us a little bit
on this diversion here over those,
but maybe the next thing would be reactive programming.
Tell us about that.
- Yeah, so Shiny was really born out of this idea
of reactive programming.
That was the motivating concept.
And for people who haven't heard that term before,
maybe heard it, but never really were clear on what it means
Reactive programming is a programming paradigm
that can be applied to many different programming languages
where it's about making it easy to program against values
that are changing over time.
So in a normal programming paradigm,
if you have a value x, say, x equals 1,
and then you have y equals x plus 1,
And then you change the value of x, the value of y does not change, right?
It's not reactive in that way.
Whereas if you were in Excel and you had, you know, one cell using another cell plus one, then you would expect that to change.
So Excel is sort of the most common example of a reactive model that I'm familiar with.
And I see.
So you wire up the data to say, this number depends
on these other numbers, and this one depends on that formula.
And the underlying reactive system just
says, we're going to do the minimum amount of recompute
to keep them up to date.
That's exactly right.
So in this case, the values that are changing
might be a slider that is in your user interface.
And when the user drags that slider from 0 to 5,
There might be all sorts of downstream calculations
that need to recompute now because you've
changed that value.
And in a world prior to reactive programming,
the dominant model was, and maybe in a lot of places
still, is callback-based programming,
or event handling is the other name for it.
And that's-- if you've ever used a framework that
had something called an onclick or something like that,
you're doing event handling.
This button is pressed.
I am going to execute this exact code in response
to a button click.
And in that world, which is a world
that I inhabited for many years, doing full-time, very
complicated UI programming using that model--
Sounds like some desktop programming, maybe
some C#, Windows Forms, something like that.
That's right.
Exactly.
I worked at Microsoft working on Windows Forms apps
that we shipped.
And RStudio was created in that paradigm as well.
And it's actually quite difficult
to do that kind of programming well.
It's very easy to understand how to code
in event-driven sort of way or using callbacks.
But to get your callback logic right
as the number of events, the number of outputs
and the number of intermediate sort of calculations
as they increase, it's really hard to number one,
keep it performant, and number two, keep it correct.
And the idea for doing a web framework for data scientists
actually predates me finding out about reactive programming.
And I actually said no.
Like, I actually-- JJ and I talked about it.
And I was like, we could do it and we should not,
unless we come up with some way that is better than event
handling.
Because what I didn't want to do was
make it easy to come up with answers that were incorrect,
which is what I think callback-based programming makes
it very easy for you to forget to update some aspect
of your calculation.
And now you have an answer, it's just not the right answer.
- Right, you update two graphs,
but there's some number that has like a total in it.
And you forget in your event handler,
you got to update all three.
And so then it looks like it knows, but yeah.
- Yeah, you'd have to update all three
in the correct order potentially, right?
'Cause one of those sub calculations
might depend on the other.
So the whole thing, it is certainly possible to create
very complex or even simple to complex interactive stuff
using callbacks, but I never felt like
this was a great way to work.
And when I was building these desktop apps,
I often felt at the end of the day,
like I had been operating at the very edges
of my mental capacity.
And it's even worse when you go to modify existing code
or, God forbid, have to help debug somebody else's UI code.
I mean, it really is very, very difficult.
And I heard about Reactive programming
via this JavaScript framework called Meteor.
And I don't know if you've heard of Meteor.
It was--
>>I've heard of it, but I haven't ever used it.
>>Yeah, not a lot of people have.
I think it was very influential in terms of its ideas,
but it didn't catch on anything like React.
But Meteor, I heard about it in 2012.
And I can't really convey how awe-inspiring it was to see.
I think I saw a five-minute demo that was
on the front page of Hacker News.
And I was just flabbergasted at what
they were doing in this demo.
And there were no event handlers anywhere,
and yet everything was just completely snappily updating.
And I was so taken aback by this that it stuck in my brain
for weeks.
I was like, how do they do that?
That doesn't make any sense to me.
And I finally did some Googling around,
and there was a Stack Overflow answer
that indicated this is more or less how it works.
And with that clue, I downloaded their source code
and found my way to how exactly it was implemented.
And I actually was getting on a plane.
And I downloaded the repo before I got on the plane.
I was like, by the time this plane lands,
I'm going to figure this out.
And it actually is a beautifully elegant mechanism
that I'll probably talk about someday.
I mean, we could talk about it now,
but I think it'll probably be the rest of our time.
But it's a beautifully elegant and ultimately quite simple
mechanism that underlies all this magic.
And when I saw that, and eventually it
took me a couple of weeks to connect the dots,
but when I realized, wait a minute,
this could be how data scientists could
create highly interactive things without fear,
without worrying that they're going
to forget to update some intermediate thing
and get the wrong answer.
Or worse, they wouldn't worry about it.
They'd just get the wrong answer and then
be angry after the fact, right?
We're going to retract that paper.
I'm sorry.
Yeah.
And on the R side, it really has--
these ideas have proven themselves out.
Year after year after year, I think
people are building incredibly cool things
in reactive programming with no background in software
engineering, much less hardcore front end web development.
So I really do believe there are a lot of different ways people
are solving this problem in Python.
Streamlit and Dash each have their own takes.
and Pinecone and Solara, all these different ones.
And the ones that sort of have thought carefully
about this problem of how do you help people programming
against what is inherently a dynamic system
while staying safe, while making sure
that you're getting the right answers every time
and doing it in an efficient way.
Those are the ones that I think are closest
to the spirit of Shiny.
And that's really why I think Shiny for Python
needed to exist.
Because I looked at Dash and Streamlit,
and I just felt like, I'm glad that people are really
getting a lot of value out of these,
especially out of Streamlit.
But I really feel like this needs to exist as well.
We really need an industrial strength reactive framework
for things that are not just top to bottom execution.
>> Yeah. One thing that's standing out to me on the page here is you talk about
there are a few utility functions to help manage or utility things to help manage reactivity.
And one is context blocks with isolate and other ones are decorators for functions.
And those two things are pretty solid Pythonic constructs of the language.
Right. And so, you know, it looks like you put some thought into not just writing R code in Python, but trying to embrace some of the Pythonic language capabilities.
Yeah, that's absolutely right. It was really important to us when we were talking about the design philosophy for Shiny for Python to really make it a Python first experience.
And that's not necessarily--
I think the other choice is defensible too,
which is let's make these two frameworks look
as similar as possible so that you can seamlessly
move from one to the other.
And I was just not convinced that anyone would really
enjoy writing R-style code in Python.
I wouldn't.
I mean, that just feels--
something feels hacky about that.
So yeah, we definitely spent some time--
And I'm not new to Python.
I think I learned Python originally in 2003,
something like that.
And I've spent some time with the language.
So yeah, it felt to me like so much of Shiny is--
this reactive programming is about creating
independent units of either this is code that generates a plot
or this is code that calculates a data frame.
And taking those little bits of code
and deciding when is the right time for each of them to run.
Because there are dependencies between these different blocks.
And the notion of these being functions
that have decorators on them felt to me
like a pretty spot-on analogy.
Like you're creating a chunk of code, which in Python
is a function, and then you are annotating it
with an indicator of your intent.
So in Shiny, you would write--
For a plot output, you would say def plot1,
or whatever you named that plot.
You would have your matplotlib code inside.
And then as a decorator to that function, you would say,
this is an output.
And the type of the output is a plot.
Now, I will say, that being said,
I have been a little bit surprised how many data
scientists in Python I've talked to have not
worked with decorators.
I mean, most of them are familiar enough.
But a non-zero amount of people have told me,
I haven't done decorators before,
and this is a little bit scary.
So that was not something that I was anticipating
going into this.
- Yeah, so I got a couple thoughts.
One is, if you went with your alternate reality,
where you said, let's make them as identical as possible,
there's certainly a case to be made for that, I agree.
But that would sort of say the primary audience
is the people that flows between R and Python.
- Exactly.
- It's certainly non-zero, but it's not like,
let's try to resonate most deeply
with just the Python community full stop
rather than the transit folks.
- Yeah, that's right.
- So I would say, I mean, looking in from the outside
that this looks like a good choice.
Second, the with concepts and the decorators
and data scientists is, I think one of the powers of Python,
the reason a lot of data scientists use it
is you can be really effective with a partial understanding,
a highly partial understanding of what Python is
and how it works, right?
Like you might not know how to create a class,
you might not even know how to create a function,
but you can still pip install a few cool libraries
or conda install them and then run top to bottom
five lines that generate an amazing output, right?
And so I think there's a,
not talking about all data science,
but I think there's a slice of kind of pretty new
to Python data science who are like,
came from somewhere else, like I heard this is awesome
and I'm starting to get some traction with it.
But even they haven't gone into,
you know, crazy concepts of decorators that take functions,
star R wraps them and returns other functions.
You know, like that said, from a syntactical perspective,
I think it's pretty easy, like, oh, this function,
it has to be reactive.
So I put @reactive event on it.
- Yeah, that's right.
Yeah, yeah.
Amir asks if there's any examples with user authentication.
I know you guys have your gallery,
which is where I skipped before,
but the gallery I think is maybe easier to quickly browse,
but there's more in the examples.
- Yeah, and honestly, we are a little behind
on the examples.
We spent a lot of the last six months working on features
and not on examples.
- You've been busy building the thing,
not talking about what you could do.
Yeah, so I think we need our examples to catch up a little bit.
I will say that user authentication is something that we have as part of both our hosted platform
and for Posit Connect.
So I think a lot of companies that are trying to sort of have a similar business model as
us and have a open source framework and also some kind of enterprise hosting often draw
the line that way.
That authentication is one of the things that isn't in the framework, it wraps the framework.
That being said, in Shiny for R, people definitely went ahead and wrote their own packages that
put authentication into the framework and made it open source.
And I'm sure those things are going to happen in Shiny for Python very quickly as well.
How similar is the execution model?
Like the internals, what's happening conceptually on the server stuff or on the web side?
I would say from...
There's a couple of ways to answer that.
I would say right now it is surprisingly close,
which is not really what we were anticipating.
Shiny for Python is written in async I/O,
and that async framework is quite different
than how async works in R.
I think we, after spending a lot of time on this implementation,
The mental model for the Shiny app author
is actually quite similar.
So where we ended up, I think it does--
for all intents and purposes, as an app author,
it's a very similar execution model.
So each user-- if you were to launch a Shiny for Python app
right now from your--
not from Wasm, but using a regular Shiny for Python,
running it out of Python, and you connected three web
browsers, they would all be running in the same process.
Each one gets their own copy of their own session, basically.
So there's no confusing whose inputs
are applying to whose outputs.
Everybody has their own copies of inputs and outputs,
and they're wired together.
But it's all running on the same process,
and it's all running--
currently, they all run on the same thread.
We do that on purpose because you can also
have shared reactives.
So you could have global variables that, essentially,
when one browser updates them, everybody gets an update.
And you could have some kind of shared scoreboard or a chat
room or whatever.
That being said, if you want, you can also do async.
So your outputs and calculations can also be async functions.
And therefore, your session, if it's
doing some kind of long-running async calculation,
can give up its control of the thread
to some other session that can execute.
>> Right, or it's doing some database thing
where it's pulling in a bunch of data.
I can say, "Wait on the database, you guys keep going."
>> Yeah, that's right.
>> Okay. So we're getting short on time here.
Let me ask you two more questions.
First one is, I think from a community perspective,
like what opens up now?
So we have R and we have Python,
and there are similarities between these,
but there's really smart people doing creative
and powerful stuff on both sides.
Because of the chronology, I guess,
mostly I imagine that there's more shiny work
that's happened on the R side than on the Python side.
But how much does this make it possible
for people who maybe wrote a book with shiny for R
and they might want a Python version?
It seems to me that having this as an option,
if the whole UI is now kind of almost equivalent,
if not syntactically identical,
like, "Oh, all of a sudden we could have these two versions
or we could move from one side of that fence to the other
and still stick with Shiny
and the same reactive programming model."
Yeah.
So I want to make sure I get your question right.
Are you talking about people who are sort of
in the Shiny ecosystem who have extension packages
and things like that?
Or are you talking about people who write shiny apps?
- People who write shiny apps.
People who are like users creating these shiny apps.
Maybe they created them in shiny for R
and they're like, I've always wanted to do a Python one,
but I really like shiny, so I'm not going anywhere.
You know, but now there's shiny for Python.
You're like, oh, maybe this is a way to have
that as an option, right?
Or I'm a teacher teaching a class at a college
and I did it with shiny and R
and they're telling me I have to move to Python.
I thought I'd use Streamlib,
but maybe now I can move over.
Like, how much do you see that scenario coming into play now?
- We absolutely are, yeah.
And I think I underestimated this a little bit.
I think what I was anticipating is that people
who are very comfortable with Shiny for R
and comfortable with R in general
might see Shiny for Python as sort of a threat,
as the Shiny team has given up on R
and all they care about is Python now
and they're selling out to the Python crowd or whatever.
And that really has not been the case at all.
And then Joe, you come on this podcast and oh my goodness.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's right.
I'm just kidding.
Yeah.
In fact, it's almost been a sense of relief.
And that applies as well to, you know, our company name was RStudio.
We rebranded Deposit.
And similarly, you know, we announced both things at the same conference that we were
going from RStudio to Deposit in terms of our company name and Shiny for Python is now
going to be a thing in addition to Shiny for R.
And I almost feel like the predominant emotion that we got from our community was relief.
Because I think unless you're in very specific fields, there's nobody that doesn't have some
Python around them, right?
That maybe your team does R, but then you have this sibling team that maybe is more
ML model heavy, and they definitely use Python, or your IT department really is a lot more
comfortable deploying Python.
And I think as much as people love R, knowing that they have the option, knowing that they
can take these ideas that they really like from R and be able to reuse them in Python.
I mean, yes, there will be some syntax to learn, but that's never the hard part, right?
I mean, the hard part is everything that you express in the syntax.
The libraries and the UIs and all that.
Yeah.
So that's really what we've heard is that people, even if they're like totally happy
with Shiny for R, they're happy that Shiny for Python exists because they know that if
the time comes where they have to add that to their toolkit, that it's an option and
they don't have to now try to map everything that they know and take for granted from Shiny
to have to map that to Dash or to Streamlit or Panel or something like that.
Yeah, you know, another example is you work at a university where R is actually really
has a good stronghold, right?
It has a-- especially in the math and statistics department.
But maybe you're working with some astronomers,
and their whole research group does Python,
and you want to work with them.
But you also want to bring shiny, right?
So that's what-- all that conversation right there
kind of encapsulates why I thought this would be a really
cool topic to have you on the show,
is it kind of opens up this bridge for a lot of people
for a lot of people in a lot of directions.
- Yeah, and speaking of bridges,
a member of my team pointed out that,
he's someone who in his previous job
went from an R organization
to like a more Python heavy organization.
And as someone who's coming from the R world,
it can be a little bit intimidating
to sort of start at the bottom of the ladder again,
especially if you're in some kind of team situation
where you're expected to be productive
to contribute to the team. And Shiny for Python, especially being new, people are coming from
the R world and sort of find themselves, whether by choice or involuntarily, needing to do
Python, that Shiny for Python might be an interesting, like you said, bridge for them
to go from one ecosystem to the other while maintaining a certain level of familiarity
to be able to deliver a lot of value.
Because one of the reasons I think Shiny
really resonated on the R side is because the things
that you build with Shiny, if they have value,
they are extremely visible.
They're extremely visible to your coworkers,
inside your organization.
You're talking about how people coming up
and saying how they've built impactful things with Shiny.
Another common theme I heard was how much Shiny
help their careers. Going from doing work in a REPL or a notebook and instead being
able to deliver very dramatic, interactive applications is a really powerful way to have
an impact in your organization.
It is. And I think data scientists, and especially this kind of visual, "let me turn the knobs
and see what happens type of experience
is the type of person that has the ear of pretty high up folks.
And if you've got powerful tools like this
to make a good impression, you're like, they asked me--
I asked them if they could give us predictions of this
or if they could rethink this.
And they came back with a new web app the next day.
Are you kidding me?
Took us six months to redesign our stupid website
for the homepage, something like this, right?
And so it lets you look good, right, to the right people.
That's right, 100%.
Yeah, cool.
Joe, I'd say you're making a big impact here.
We got Alan out there saying, "I just started using Shiny during this live stream."
Yes.
How hard is it to deploy this into an AWS EC2 instance, for example?
Yeah, you totally can.
So I think the easiest thing to do is to look up Shiny Server.
Most of the documentation talks about, you know, you might find it on the R side of the website,
but it's actually all the same.
So if you're using Ubuntu, it's a simple install
of a Debian package.
If you're using Fedora, it's an RPM.
And it should be pretty easy to get started with.
But also, don't forget that you can also just sling it
into our free hosting, especially
if you're just getting started.
>>Luis: Yeah, excellent, excellent.
Roadmap, let's close it out with roadmap.
>>Yeah, so in the upcoming release,
we have been focused a lot on UI components.
And that's something that we're going to continue
to focus on for a while.
I think we definitely want to make
the more dashboard-y type applications very easy to write.
And we also are wanting to beef up on the output side
some of our widgets.
So we don't have a great table widget right now.
It just kind of takes a Pandas table
and renders it to HTML using Pandas Styler.
But we want to have a fast scalable virtual grid,
basically.
And also for more interactive type outputs like that,
I should mention that we support IPy widgets natively.
So most IPy widgets will just drop right in,
including Plotly and PyDeck.
And well, most of them work just fine.
And we'll be doing more to make some of those
feel a little bit more native.
And the IPy widget stuff works great.
But I think we also want to make it
feel a little bit more functional in some cases
than object-oriented.
Yeah, and we have a lot of examples to write,
a lot of documentation to write.
And there are also quite a few features
to port over from Shiny for R. And the last thing I'll say
is that automated testing is something
that we are working on as well, making it easier for you
to write automated tests for your Shiny for Python apps.
It's an approach that's based on Playwright
that we use internally right now,
but we're gonna have helper classes and functions
to make it a little less boilerplatey
to write these kinds of tests for Shiny for Python apps.
- Nice, Playwright's really cool.
- Yeah, yeah, very, very, yeah, very, very cool.
- Like Selenium, but more Pythonic, so.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, it's a cool roadmap.
People want-- if they've got ideas,
they want to reach out to you.
Is GitHub an option?
Do they open an issue?
Do they email you?
How do they reach you?
>> Yeah, so we have a--
GitHub issue is always appreciated.
And we will absolutely read those and engage.
We also have a Discord for things that are a little more--
if you want a little bit more of a back and forth.
Or do you just want to meet us?
Do you just want to talk about any of the design decisions
we've made or how we might be different than XYZ framework?
We're happy to talk to anyone and everyone.
And I think to get to the Discord
is on our GitHub home page, I believe.
Excellent.
Let's see if I can find a Discord.
There you have it.
Join us on Discord right on the home page
and the readme of the GitHub.
- Yeah.
- Awesome.
All right, Joe, thanks for being here.
- Thanks for creating this. - Thank you.
- This is cool.
I think it's a nice contribution and really,
like I said, it's a cool bridge
between the R and Python communities.
- Oh, thank you.
If you don't mind me saying so,
I really enjoy your podcast
and I think that you're quite good at this
and I just really appreciate all the conversations
that you've had.
You seem like just a really generous interviewer,
and you do a really great job of helping people really
feel three-dimensional, even when we're talking
about very technical stuff.
So I appreciate that.
>>Luis: I really appreciate that.
That's super kind.
Thank you for saying that.
And thank you for being on the show.
So--
>>Tom: Yeah, my pleasure.
>>Luis: We'll put all the links in the show notes
for all these things.
People can check them out there.
And yeah, see you next time.
>>Tom: All right, thanks so much.
[BLANK_AUDIO]